British political parties have approached the surveillance agency GCHQ for advice on beefing up their internet security after a cyber-attack during the 2015 UK general election and the hacking in the US last year of the Democratic party.

Asked if any UK parties had asked for help, Martin said: "There is talk about it and we are ready to work [with them]. We have had some approaches and we would expect to be offering seminars and that sort of thing for political parties in the future. Have not done it yet. But we would expect to. But only if they asked." When asked if they had made such a request, he replied: "Not formally".

"Across the west we are on the alert and looking at defences in that sort of area of the electoral process." Asked about concerns over interference in the British political system by potential hacking of political parties, Martin said: "So what I would say is that protecting the integrity of the electoral democratic systems is up there with the top priorities. Of course it is. But it is not just a question of something happens to the Democratic National Committee, therefore we look at the corporate networks of British political parties."You have to look at the totality of this," he said, adding that it was not just about the security of the parties but the political system as a whole.

"We look at what is going on in government networks. We did a huge amount of work in the last parliament when there was the move to online and individual electoral registration to protect that system. And also, frankly, we give advice, a brochure, to every parliamentarian after [their] election and we advise generically people with high public profiles on what they need to do in their personal electronic lives." The chief technical director of the new cybersecurity centre, Ian Levy, said that political parties were set up like medium-sized enterprises and constituency parties like small enterprises.

The kind of advice given to medium-size and small enterprises could be given to political parties, he added.
