British political parties have approached the surveillance agency GCHQ for advice on beefing up their internet security after a cyber-attack during the 2015 UK general election and the hacking in the US last year of the Democratic party.  Ciaran Martin, head of the UK’s National Cyber Security Centre, which is part of GCHQ and was officially opened on Tuesday, confirmed informal contact had been made by the parties and that he expected to be asked formally to provide advice on how to increase their digital security.  He did not specify which parties had made approaches.  The idea of political parties engaging with the intelligence services is a sensitive issue. But such concern is being pushed aside by fears of the impact of a major hack along the lines of that in the US last year, which caused huge damage and embarrassment to the Democrats. Russian state hackers have been blamed by US intelligence.  Asked if any UK parties had asked for help, Martin said: 'There is talk about it and we are ready to work [with them]. We have had some approaches and we would expect to be offering seminars and that sort of thing for political parties in the future. Have not done it yet. But we would expect to. But only if they asked.'  When asked if they had made such a request, he replied: 'not formally'.  Martin was speaking to journalists after the official opening by the Queen of the new centre, which has been set up as the public face of GCHQ and that is intended to give advice to businesses, members of the public and others worried about cybersecurity.  He said there had been a step-up in cyber-attacks on the west over the last two years and, with elections this year in the Netherlands, France and Germany, there was concern about protecting the democratic process. 'Across the west we are on the alert and looking at defences in that sort of area of the electoral process.'  Asked about concerns over interference in the British political system by potential hacking of political parties, Martin said: 'So what I would say is that protecting the integrity of the electoral democratic systems is up there with the top priorities. Of course it is. But it is not just a question of something happens to the Democratic National Committee, therefore we look at the corporate networks of British political parties.  'You have to look at the totality of this,' he said, adding that it was not just about the security of the parties but the political system as a whole. 'Of course, we will try to look at political parties. But we support the parliamentary authorities at their request because we are constitutionally different from parliament.  'We look at what is going on in government networks. We did a huge amount of work in the last parliament when there was the move to online and individual electoral registration to protect that system. And also, frankly, we give advice, a brochure, to every parliamentarian after [their] election and we advise generically people with high public profiles on what they need to do in their personal electronic lives.'  The chief technical director of the new cybersecurity centre, Ian Levy, said that political parties were set up like medium-sized enterprises and constituency parties like small enterprises. The kind of advice given to medium-size and small enterprises could be given to political parties, he added.  The Conservative party has tended to be closer to the intelligence community down the decades than Labour, where there is a residue of suspicion. During the cold war, leftwingers were often targets of surveillance by the intelligence services.  Advice from the cybersecurity service would not be foolproof, although advice might have helped the Democratic party being hacked. More problematic would have been personal emails such as that of the chairman of Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign John Podesta, which would have required him to take personal security precautions. 