The bill empowering the government to begin the formal process of leaving the European Union has reached its final stages in the Commons.
Several attempts to change the draft legislation have been outvoted.
Labour's shadow business secretary Clive Lewis quit the shadow cabinet "with a heavy heart" rather than follow party orders to vote for the bill.
The final result of the third reading vote is expected at 20:15 GMT, and if passed it moves to the Lords.
If passed, the European Union (Notification of Withdrawal) Bill will authorise Prime Minister Theresa May to begin Brexit talks under Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty.

Leader Jeremy Corbyn ordered his MPs to support the government's bill, whether his party's amendments are accepted or not, as he believes it would be undemocratic to ignore the will of the people, as expressed in last June's EU referendum.

Shadow Brexit secretary Sir Keir Starmer insisted Labour would keep "chipping away" at the government's plans, pushing for concessions on tariff-free access to the single market and the future of the UK's tax regime.
Once the bill passes the Commons, it will be debated in the House of Lords after it returns from recess on 20 February.
During the wide-ranging debate, Labour former minister Caroline Flint said rules needed to be brought in to manage migration, as the "net benefits" had "not been equally shared across the country".
SNP justice spokeswoman Joanna Cherry warned that the government could face "a slew of legal claims" if it did not address the rights of EU nationals living in the UK before starting the Brexit process.
Brexit minister David Jones said "once again" that the government recognised the issue of EU nationals' rights was "extremely important" and will address it "as a matter of priority".
He urged all MPs to withdraw their amendments so "we can start the process of withdrawal" from the European Union.
On Tuesday, MPs rejected a bid by Labour's Chris Leslie to force the government to consult Parliament on the deal struck with the EU before it is finalised.
It came after ministers pledged that a "meaningful" vote would be offered.
Labour and some Tories had pushed for MPs to have a decisive say on the final terms, but the 326 to 293 vote meant the bill remained unchanged.
